now the US Senate Majority Leader Chuck
Schumer has called for new elections in
Israel saying the Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu is a major obstacle
to peace and risked making Israel a
pariah Senator Schumer said it was a
grave mistake for Israel to reject a
two-state solution the fourth major
obstacle to peace is Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu who has all too frequently
bowed to the demands of extremists like
minister smotri and Ben gavier and the
settlers in the West Bank now this comes
after the Israeli military said it plans
to move nearly 1 and a half million
displaced Palestinians in Rafa to what
it described as humanitarian islands in
the middle of the Gaza Strip Aid
agencies have insisted that safely
moving such a large number of people in
a war zone would be almost impossible
and an assault on Rafa could prove
disastrous Merlin Tomas from verifi has
been looking at where Israel might try
to move the people from Rafa the Israeli
Army has said it plans to move
Palestinians out of the city of Rafa in
southern Gaza to what it describes as
humanitarian Islands it comes ahead of a
planned military offensive in Rafa and
Rafa is at the southern border with
Egypt over a million displaced
Palestinians are currently Sheltering
there after being forced to leave their
homes because of the Israeli offensive
elsewhere and this is a image from
before in December look at this road and
this area and this is one from late
February and you can see just how many
people are there tents are everywhere
even on roads so where will people go
from Rafa we don't know the Israeli
statement doesn't specify exactly where
but there are already questions of where
in the rest of Gaza has the
infrastructure and buildings still
intact to shelter people coming from
Rafa take a look at this map this is the
Gaza Strip
and this is a map of all of the areas
that have been damaged that's the red
patches that you can see those are areas
that have been damaged or destroyed
since the beginning of the war after all
the people who came to Rafa came because
they were seeing much more intense
bombing in the rest of Gaza uh one of
the most heavily affected areas is carun
it's a city in southern Gaza some 7
kmers North of Rafa this is a satellite
image from December and this is from
February and you can see how some of
those neighborhoods have been completely
flattened there and
again is in central Gaza again this is
from
October and this is from March and you
can see just how extensive that damage
is and getting anywhere in Gaza is a
huge challenge there's only one main
road from the south to the north that's
fully operational right now and that's
being used to transport Aid it's the
coastal Road here this orange one called
alash road so in order to move over a
million people out of Rafa safe routes
will likely have to be created Israeli
military spokesperson Daniel hagari has
said this planned evacuation of
Palestinians to so-called humanitarian
Islands would be carried out in
coordination with International actors
but last night US Secretary of State
Anthony blinkin has said he's not seen
any details of an evacuation plan and
any evacuation of over a million people
will take time but the plans for how
exactly that will happen is
unclear that was Merlin Thomas from uh
BBC verify and just uh backing up what
she's saying we just had a statement
from the white house uh saying that they
cannot confirm whether Israel has plans
to relocate people out of Rafa uh let's
speak to Al benari senior fellow at the
Jerusalem Institute for strategy and
security hello to you thank you for
joining us here on BBC News um so plans
although this has been announced this
plan for humanitarian Islands moving
what more than a million people
potentially from uh from Rafa how
logistically uh could that happen in
effectively a war
zone first of all good afternoon and
good evening um I would say it's a huge
logistical
undertaking we are talking about at
least two major areas one would be
pushing the uh the civilians in the Raa
area towards the uh the coast and up
north a bit to the north towards the
southern part of central Gaza which is
still an open area that's one
possibility for major effort the other
is that we've been having
consistent um I would say reporting
about
Egypt creating a humanitarian area just
on the border of Rafa in the Egyptian
area so this would be these would be two
major areas now having said that one
must realize that the very acts of
establishing an infrastructure which
includes tents uh sewage running water
some kind of public facilities for
healthare for government and so on is
something that will take months to carry
out well that's interest that's
interesting that you bring up the the
matter of timing because as you say with
that amount of people and those amount
of logistics that will take
time that's right and and obviously
certainly in the Gaza area the idea of
the one to be there and control all the
U establishment of the infrastructure
now if I may another little comment this
is as you said before there are no
actual plans that have been uh published
or disseminated to the general public
but it does fit what have been we we in
Israel have been told by the IDF
that the whole campaign will take months
to take to complete people are talking
about 2025 perhaps
2026 so this effort it will take a long
while but it does fit with the overall
idea of the IDF campaign in G and what
do you make to the statement by the
White House that we just uh talked about
there with the fact that they are saying
they have no idea of the plans that they
are not aware of these plans um it does
rather seem that there has been in more
pressure from uh the the White House
Administration to try and find out what
is going on what Israel's plans are but
clearly um Israel not sharing them at at
this uh stage I I agree completely with
the idea that uh uh B Benjamin Netanyahu
is completely beholden because of the
structure of his coalition to the
radicals smotri and uh Ben and and
others and so on and and uh knowing BB
at least according to his track record
he's holding all the cards very close to
his heart and in a sense based again on
uh
presidents uh he will perhaps wait for
even greater American pressure being put
on Israel and coming out with certain
plans we've seen this time and again
during this campaign where the US would
say uh more human Arian Aid R netan
prevaricates and finally if you like
capitulates and so on the very fact uh
one must understand that the Israel the
idef is quite a porous institution in
Israel and so we are getting various
media reports about this possibility of
these humanitarian Islands any concrete
plans I don't have any idea myself um
one of one of the objectives clearly of
the IDF or the main objectives is to uh
get rid of any Hamas operatives I just
wonder when you potentially are moving
more than a million people from one area
to another how do you separate how do
you identify those Hamas operatives um
how would they go about doing that
logistically this would be uh this was
this this is one of the things that may
take time so if the IDF creates various
kinds of check points roadblocks and so
on they will have to check each and
every individual now the big there are
two big worries from the point of view
of the IDM with the Hamas operatives in
indeed seeping into these humanitarian
Islands that's one that is uh Hamas
operatives on the other hand the IDF is
very worried that the Hamas May
potentially start to control these uh
humanitarian Islands instead for example
dominating or controlling uh all the
access to uh to food medicine and so on
just just as it is has done and is doing
in Gaza one more point which may
interest uh International audience is
that we're hearing I would say the last
month or so various suggestions about
creating a governmental or a military
government the same kind of government
through which Israel uh occupied and
controlled the West Bank and Gaza before
the withdrawal 2005 and before the Oslo
Accords that is in every one of these
humanitarian islands and perhaps in
other parts of Gaza you would have a
military governor and an apparatus under
him we'll have to leave it there it's
really good to talk to you really
appreciate your time thank you thank you
very much